---
title: Deacons Fund Biblical Principles
showInFooter: false
headerColour: dark
path: /deaconsfund/principles
template: basic
---

**THIS IS A DRAFT - PLEASE DO NOT SHARE THIS LINK YET**

*The CCM Deacons Fund was set up to care for the immediate needs of church family members. Here, in a paper from 2014 (but still timely!), vicar Matt Fuller sets out the theology behind the funs, and some principles that the Deacons aim to apply in our work.*

A Diaconate Fund (or Deacon’s Fund) has historically been set up by churches as an officially recognised and permanent fund, designated to care for the financial needs within the church family.

## The Biblical principles of a Diaconate Fund

The ministry of the word in order to make disciples of all nations is the priority of the local church (Matthew 28:19) but we are frequently commanded throughout the New Testament to love one another, not only by teaching, edifying and exhorting one another with Jesus’ words but in the concrete actions of generous, material support and practical help for immediate needs. Given the many needs around us it’s important to establish, from God’s word, which we are responsible for and how far our responsibility for their circumstance of need extends.

The Bible seems to give us two principles:

1. We are most responsible to help those closest to us
2. We are most responsible to help those least able to help themselves

## Principle 1: We are most responsible to help those closest to us

God’s word teaches that we have a primary responsibility to those closest to us. If we have dependents, we have a responsibility to provide for them. 1 Tim 5:8 says that “Anyone who does not provide for their relatives, and especially for their own household, has denied the faith and is worse than an unbeliever.” This suggests that not providing for family members who are unable to provide for themselves, i.e. children not yet in adulthood, adult children who are in need (and not lazy, see 1 Thess 4:11-12, 5:14, 2 Thess 3:10) or ageing, helpless parents, indicates a turning away from Christ in your own heart. The Bible is no less strong or explicit in its commands that Christians should care for their church family so we could put ‘natural family’ and ‘spiritual family’ in the same sphere of responsibility.

For two strong warnings against not caring for your church family, see James 2:15-17: “*Suppose a brother or a sister is without clothes and daily food. If one of you says to them, “Go in peace; keep warm and well fed,” but does nothing about their physical needs, what good is it? In the same way, faith by itself, if it is not accompanied by action,is dead.*” And 1 John 3:16-18: “*This is how we know what love is: Jesus Christ laid down his life for us. And we ought to lay down our lives for our brothers and sisters. If anyone has material possessions and sees a brother or sister in need but has no pity on them, how can the love of God be in that person? Dear children, let us not love with words or speech but with actions and in truth.*” Both passages warn that not helping a Christian in our church family who is materially devastated by calamity or infirmity, whilst having the resources to help in some way, could be indicative of not truly knowing Jesus Christ or wanting to follow is his path of sacrificial love. The New Testament also gives us plenty of examples of this being done.

See Acts 4:32-34: “*All the believers were one in heart and mind. No one claimed that anyof their possessions was their own, but they shared everything they had. With great power the apostles continued to testify to the resurrection of the Lord Jesus. And God’s grace was so powerfully at work in them allthat there were no needy persons among them...*”

Acts 6:1-6
> “In those days when the number of disciples was increasing, the Hellenistic Jews among them complained against the Hebraic Jews because their widows were beingoverlooked in the daily distribution of food. So the Twelve gathered all the disciples together and said, “It would not be right for us to neglect the ministry of the word of Godin order to wait on tables. Brothers and sisters, choose seven men from among you who are known to be full of the Spirit and wisdom. We will turn this responsibility over to themand will give our attention to prayer and the ministry of the word.” This proposal pleased the whole group. They chose Stephen, a man full of faith and of the Holy Spirit; also Philip, Procorus, Nicanor, Timon, Parmenas, and Nicolas from Antioch, a convert to Judaism. They presented these men to the apostles, who prayed and laid their hands on them.”

And Hebrews 10:34 “*You suffered along with those in prison and joyfully accepted the confiscation of your property, because you knew that you yourselves had better and lasting possessions.*” These passages show that poverty and extreme need should not exist in the lives of individuals within a church family. It is only right that practical steps are taken to demonstrate loving fellowship with those in distress and provide for their needs.

Acts 6:1-6 gives us a template for the appointment of godly men who will take responsibility for the organised provision of material support for those in need within the church so that the responsibility doesn’t fall to those who should be devoted to the ministry of teaching the word. The ministry of the word shouldn’t be neglected or submerged by a focus on meeting the practical or material needs in the church family.

After our natural family and immediate church family, our responsibility is to our brothersand sisters in Christ further away. An example of this comes in 2 Corinthians 8-9 where Paul encourages the church in Corinth to ‘excel in the grace of giving’ (2 Corinthians 8:7) by sending money to support Christians who are struggling in Macedonia but he doesn’t lay it down as a command, (“*I am not commanding you, but I want to test the sincerity ofyour love by comparing it with the earnestness of others.*” 2 Corinthians 8:8), rather it is a loving encouragement to be generous and grow in that area of godliness as they exhibit growing godliness in other areas. We see another example of this non-obligatory but cheerful giving in Acts 11:29-30, “*The disciples, as each one was able, decided to provide help for the brothers and sisters living in Judea. This they did, sending their gift to the elders by Barnabas and Saul.*” And finally we have the needs of those outside of the body of believers. We should be ready to do good to all people but this support is less obligatory than what we owe other Christians and is to be governed by the “*opportunities*” that present themselves to us. Galatians 6:10 expresses this, saying “*Therefore, as we have opportunity, let us do good to all people, especially to those who belong to the family of believers.*” Here Paul clearly gives the priority of caring for our Christian family over and above the care we show to the non-Christian world around us.

(It’s important to note that this order of priority in our responsibility is generally what the Bible teaches but it should never justify a lack of care when we are faced with immediateand obvious need that we are in a unique position to help with. This seems to be part of the point Jesus is making in the Good Samaritan (Luke 10:25-37). If we see someone dying at the side of the road, we should stop and do what we can! It would be wrong to ignore that need, regardless of whether the person is a stranger, a church member, a family member, believer or non.)

## Principle 2: We are most responsible to help those least able to help themselves

We are most responsible to help those least able to help themselves according to James 1:27: “*Religion that God our Father accepts as pure and faultless is this: to look after 
orphans and widows in their distress and to keep oneself from being polluted by the world.*” The “*orphans and widows*” were the most helpless in the society of the time. Today that might not be the case but the principle remains; that we ought to care for those in our church family who would undoubtedly fall into desperate circumstances unless we provide a safety net.

It’s worth noting that there is not very much about addressing situations of on-going need in the Bible; most passages about providing help to the poor and needy do seem to suggest more immediate, short-term acts of charity. However, both Acts 6:1-6 (see above) and 1 Timothy 5 are helpful passages to consider when providing more long-term help.

See 1 Timothy 5:3-16:
> “Give proper recognition to those widows who are really in need. But if a widow has children or grandchildren, these should learn first of all to put their religion into practice by caring for their own family and so repaying their parents and grandparents, for this is pleasing to God. The widow who is really in need and left all alone puts her hope in God and continues night and day to pray and to ask God for help. But the widow who lives forpleasure is dead even while she lives. Give the people these instructions, so that no one may be open to blame. Anyone who does not provide for their relatives, and especially for their own household, has denied the faith and is worse than an unbeliever. No widow may be put on the list of widows unless she is over sixty, has been faithful to her husband,and is well known for her good deeds, such as bringing up children, showing hospitality, washing the feet of the Lord’s people, helping those in trouble and devoting herself to all kinds of good deeds. As for younger widows, do not put them on such a list. For when their sensual desires overcome their dedication to Christ, they want to marry. Thus they bring judgment on themselves, because they have broken their first pledge. Besides, they get into the habit of being idle and going about from house to house. And not only do they become idlers, but also busybodies who talk nonsense, saying things they ought not to. So I counsel younger widows to marry, to have children, to manage their homes and to give the enemy no opportunity for slander. Some have in fact alreadyturned away to follow Satan. If any woman who is a believer has widows in her care, she should continue to help them and not let the church be burdened with them, so that the church can help those widows who are really in need.”

Three times in this passage Paul points out that the church must provide help for those who are ‘really in need’ and not those who had other sources of support and income available to them, such as blood relatives who are able to provide for them. Christian relatives evidently should “learn first of all to put their religion into practice by caring for their own family and so repaying their parents and grandparents, for this is pleasing to God” (v4). Younger widows had the opportunity to marry again and be supported in that way so were not, in that context, considered to be those really in need. Paul is also concerned that only those of known godly character should be supported over the long-term. Presumably this was to avoid indirectly encouraging ungodly idleness in an individual. Apart from being an unwise use of funds, this would not serve the individual inthe long-term, discouraging them from confronting sin. Paul warned Church elders in his letters to the Thessalonians not to support the able-bodied who could provide for themselves but were lazy or ill-disciplined. In his first letter he encouraged working hard to provide for themselves “so that you will not be dependent on anybody” which in turn should “*win the respect of outsiders*” (1 Thessalonians 4:11-12) He continues later to say “*...we urge you, brothers and sisters, warn those who are idle and disruptive...*” (1 Thessalonians 5:14) Paul clearly wants to warn Church elders against allowing compassion for those in apparent need to promote sinful behaviour which will ultimately bring a level of disrepute to the church. In 2 Thessalonians 3:10 & 14 he encourages strong discipline of those who are lazy, saying, “*For even when we were with you, we gave you this rule: “The one who is unwilling to work shall not eat.” ... “Take special note of anyone who does not obey our instruction in this letter. Do not associate with them, in order that they may feel ashamed.*”

## A summary of the basic principles

The Bible won’t give specific answers for every situation of need that presents itself, but the passages referred to do provide basic principles and examples to inform wise decision-making. The Acts 6 example of early church elders selecting deacons to overseethe practical care of needy members of the church gives us a Biblical model for the formation of a ‘Diaconate Fund’.

As a church, the basic principles we should consider in who to help are: proximity and necessity, i.e. the closer the person is to you (relationally, spiritually and geographically) and the more acute the need, the greater our obligation is to get involved and assist in the best possible way. All of this should be done with two caveats: meeting the practical and material needs of church family should in no way cause the ministry of the word to be neglected, nor should it cause sin to be tolerated or encouraged in the individual.


*Matt Fuller, Senior Minister, Christ Church Mayfair, 2014*

You can find out how to get help [here](/deaconsfund).